README.md, before:

# ⚡ Faster Chat

<p align="left">
  <a href="https://preactjs.com/">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Preact-10.25-673AB7?logo=preact" alt="Preact" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://hono.dev/">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Hono-4.7-FF6B00" alt="Hono" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://tailwindcss.com/">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Tailwind-4.1-38BDF8?logo=tailwindcss" alt="Tailwind CSS" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://tanstack.com/router">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/TanStack%20Router-1.98-FF4154" alt="TanStack Router" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://dexie.org/">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Dexie-IndexedDB-orange?logo=javascript" alt="Dexie" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://sdk.vercel.ai/">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Vercel%20AI%20SDK-Streaming-black?logo=vercel" alt="Vercel AI SDK" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://bun.sh/">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Bun-Fast%20Builds-yellow?logo=bun" alt="Bun" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green" alt="MIT License" />
  </a>
</p>

> **A blazingly fast, privacy-first chat interface for AI that works with any LLM provider—cloud or completely offline.**

Connect to OpenAI, Anthropic, Groq, Mistral, or run completely offline with [Ollama](https://ollama.ai/) or [LMStudio](https://lmstudio.ai/) or even [llama.cpp](https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp). Your conversations stay local in on your machine. No vendor lock-in, no tracking, full control.

![Faster Chat Interface](faster-chat.png)

## ✨ Features

**Core**
- 💬 Real-time streaming chat with Vercel AI SDK
- ⚡ **Blazingly fast** - 3KB Preact runtime, zero SSR overhead, instant responses
- 🗄️ **Conversations stay on your machine** - Local-first IndexedDB & SQLite storage, never sent to server
- 🤖 Multi-provider support: OpenAI, Anthropic, Ollama, Groq, Mistral, custom APIs
- 📎 File attachments with preview and download
- 📝 Markdown rendering with syntax highlighting and LaTeX support
- 📱 Responsive design for desktop, tablet, and mobile (reguraly improving)

**Administration**
- 🔐 Multi-user authentication with role-based access (admin/member/readonly)
- 🔌 **Provider Hub**: Auto-discover models with [models.dev](https://models.dev) integration
- 🛡️ Admin panel for user management (CRUD, password reset, role changes)
- 🔑 Encrypted API key storage with server-side encryption

**Deployment**
- 🌐 Works completely offline with local models (Ollama, LM Studio, etc.)
- 🐳 One-command Docker deployment with optional HTTPS via Caddy
- 🎨 Modern stack: Preact + Hono + TanStack + Tailwind 4.1

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- [Bun](https://bun.sh/) (recommended) or Node.js 20+
- At least one AI provider:
  - **Offline**: [Ollama](https://ollama.ai/) running locally
  - **Cloud**: API key from OpenAI, Anthropic, Groq, Mistral, or OpenRouter
  - **Self-Hosted**: LM Studio, vLLM, or any OpenAI-compatible inference server

### Installation

```bash
# Clone and install
git clone https://github.com/1337hero/faster-next-chat.git
cd faster-next-chat
bun install

# Start development servers
bun run dev
```

The app will be available at:
- **Frontend**: http://localhost:3000
- **API Server**: http://localhost:3001

### First-Time Setup

1. **Register an account** at http://localhost:3000/login
   - The first account is automatically promoted to admin
2. **Configure AI providers** in the Admin Panel (`/admin` → Providers tab):
   - Add OpenAI, Anthropic, or other cloud providers with API keys
   - Configure local providers (Ollama, LM Studio) with custom endpoints
   - API keys are encrypted and stored securely server-side
3. **Enable models** in the Admin Panel (Providers tab → Refresh Models)
   - Select which models appear in the chat interface
   - Set default model for new chats

![API Connections Management](connections.png)
*Configure providers and API keys in the Admin Panel*

![Available Models](models.png)
*Enable and manage models from all your providers*

### Using Offline with Ollama

```bash
# Install Ollama (macOS/Linux)
curl -fsSL https://ollama.ai/install.sh | sh

# Pull a model
ollama pull llama3.2

# Start Ollama (usually runs automatically)
ollama serve

# In Faster Chat Admin Panel:
# 1. Go to /admin → Providers tab
# 2. Add Custom Provider with base URL: http://localhost:11434
# 3. Refresh Models to discover available Ollama models
```

### Custom Provider Setup

Faster Chat works with **any OpenAI-compatible API**. Add custom providers through the Admin Panel:

**LM Studio**
- Base URL: `http://localhost:1234/v1`
- No API key required

**Groq Cloud**
- Base URL: `https://api.groq.com/openai/v1`
- API Key: `gsk_...`

**OpenRouter** (access 100+ models)
- Base URL: `https://openrouter.ai/api/v1`
- API Key: `sk-or-...`

**Mistral AI**
- Base URL: `https://api.mistral.ai/v1`
- API Key: Your Mistral API key

**Self-hosted vLLM/TGI**
- Base URL: `http://your-server:8000/v1`
- API Key: Optional, depending on your setup

## 💻 Development

### Commands

**Root (recommended)**
```bash
bun run dev         # Start frontend + backend concurrently
bun run build       # Build all packages for production
bun run start       # Run production builds
bun run clean       # Remove all build artifacts
bun run format      # Format code with Prettier
```

**Frontend**
```bash
cd frontend
bun run dev         # Vite dev server on :3000
bun run build       # Production build to dist/
bun run preview     # Preview production build
```

**Backend**
```bash
cd server
bun run dev         # Hono dev server on :3001
bun run build       # Build for production
bun run start       # Run production server on :3001
```

### Project Structure

See WIKI for detailed architecture documentation. Quick overview:

```
faster-chat/
├── frontend/        # Preact SPA
│   ├── components/  # UI components
│   ├── hooks/       # Custom hooks
│   ├── lib/         # Utilities, DB, API
│   └── state/       # Zustand stores
├── server/          # Hono API server
│   ├── routes/      # API endpoints
│   ├── lib/         # Database, auth, utils
│   └── data/        # SQLite DB + uploads
└── packages/
    └── shared/      # Shared constants
```

## 🐳 Docker Deployment

### Quick Start

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/1337hero/faster-next-chat.git
cd faster-next-chat

# Create environment file with encryption key
echo "API_KEY_ENCRYPTION_KEY=$(node -e "console.log(require('crypto').randomBytes(32).toString('hex'))")" > server/.env

# Start with Docker
docker compose up -d

# Access at http://localhost:8787
```

**First-time setup:**
1. Register your first user (becomes admin automatically)
2. Configure AI providers in Admin Panel (`/admin` → Providers tab)
3. Add your API keys and refresh models

### Architecture

**Hybrid build for maximum compatibility:**
- Builder: Bun 1.3 on Debian (fast dependency installation)
- Runtime: Node.js 22 on Debian (native module compatibility)
- Port: 8787 (configurable via `APP_PORT`)
- Storage: SQLite database in `chat-data` volume

### HTTPS with Caddy (Optional)

For production deployments with automatic HTTPS:

```bash
# Start with Caddy reverse proxy
docker compose -f docker-compose.yml -f docker-compose.caddy.yml up -d

# Local development: http://localhost
# Production: Edit Caddyfile with your domain, point DNS, restart
```

**Features:**
- Automatic HTTPS with Let's Encrypt
- Certificate auto-renewal
- HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 support
- Compression and security headers
- Only 13MB overhead (Alpine-based)

See `docs/caddy-https-setup.md` and `docs/docker-setup.md` for details.

### Configuration

**Environment Variables** (`server/.env`):

```bash
# Required: Encryption key for API keys
API_KEY_ENCRYPTION_KEY=...  # Generate with crypto.randomBytes(32)

# Optional: Configure via Admin Panel instead
APP_PORT=8787              # Internal port (default: 8787)
NODE_ENV=production        # Environment mode
DATABASE_URL=sqlite:///app/server/data/chat.db

# For local Ollama access from Docker
OLLAMA_BASE_URL=http://host.docker.internal:11434
```

**Common Commands:**

```bash
docker compose up -d                # Start
docker compose logs -f              # View logs
docker compose down                 # Stop
docker compose up -d --build        # Rebuild

# Reset database
docker compose down
docker volume rm faster-chat_chat-data
docker compose up -d
```


## 🗺️ Roadmap

### Completed ✅
- Preact + Hono migration from Next.js
- Streaming chat with Vercel AI SDK
- Local-first persistence (IndexedDB + SQLite)
- Multi-provider support (OpenAI, Anthropic, Ollama, custom APIs)
- Admin panel for providers, models, and users
- Role-based access control
- File attachments with preview/download
- Markdown, code highlighting, LaTeX rendering
- Docker deployment with optional HTTPS

### In Progress 🚧
- [ ] Tool calling implementation (infrastructure ready)
- [ ] Image generation integration (DALL-E, Stable Diffusion, local models)
- [ ] Web search capabilities (optional internet access for AI)


### Planned 📋

**Settings & UX**
- [ ] Keyboard shortcuts and accessibility improvements
- [ ] Advanced user preferences UI (themes, defaults, behavior)
- [ ] Conversation branching (explore alternative responses)
- [ ] Import & Export Data Functionality (JSON, Markdown, CSV)

**Advanced Capabilities**
- [ ] Local RAG with vector search (private document search)
- [ ] Voice input/output (speech-to-text, text-to-speech)
- [ ] Multi-modal requests (vision, audio)
- [ ] Conversation sharing and collaboration

**Infrastructure**

- [ ] PostgreSQL backend option (for larger deployments)
- [ ] Plugin system for custom extensions
- [ ] Mobile app (Capacitor)

## 🎨 Design Philosophy

**Faster Chat** is built on these principles:

- **Privacy-First**: Your data lives in your browser. Server is optional.
- **Provider-Agnostic**: Never locked into a single AI vendor.
- **Minimal Runtime**: 3KB Preact, no SSR overhead, instant responses.
- **Offline-Capable**: Run completely offline with local models.
- **Fast Iteration**: Bun for speed, no TypeScript ceremony, clear patterns.
- **Simple Code**: Small focused components, derive state in render, delete aggressively.

### Why No TypeScript?

We chose **speed over ceremony**. TypeScript's compile step and constant type churn across fast-moving AI SDKs slowed development more than it helped.

**Our guardrails:**
- Runtime validation at system boundaries
- Shared constants and clear contracts
- Tests for critical paths
- JSDoc for complex functions

**Trade-off:** Less friction, faster iteration, easier contribution.

See WIKI for detailed coding principles and architecture documentation.

## 🙏 Credits & Acknowledgments

**Faster Chat** is built on the shoulders of excellent open source projects:

**Core Infrastructure**
- [Vercel AI SDK](https://github.com/vercel/ai) - Streaming chat completions and multi-provider support
- [models.dev](https://github.com/sst/models.dev) - Community-maintained AI model database for auto-discovery
- [Preact](https://preactjs.com/) - Lightweight 3KB React alternative
- [Hono](https://hono.dev/) - Ultrafast web framework for the backend
- [Dexie.js](https://dexie.org/) - Elegant IndexedDB wrapper for local-first storage
- [TanStack Router](https://tanstack.com/router) & [TanStack Query](https://tanstack.com/query) - Modern routing and server state management

**UI & Styling**
- [Tailwind CSS](https://tailwindcss.com/) - Utility-first CSS framework
- [lucide-react](https://lucide.dev/) - Beautiful icon library
- [Catppuccin](https://github.com/catppuccin/catppuccin) - Soothing pastel theme

**External API Calls**

For transparency, this application makes the following external API calls:
- **models.dev/api.json** - Fetches provider and model metadata on server startup (cached for 1 hour)
- **Your configured AI providers** (OpenAI, Anthropic, etc.) - Only when you send chat messages
- **No tracking, analytics, or telemetry services** - Your privacy is paramount

All conversations stay local in your browser's IndexedDB. The server handles authentication, provider configuration, and file uploads—but never stores your chat messages.

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions welcome! We're looking for:
- Bug fixes and error handling
- New provider integrations
- Documentation improvements
- UI/UX enhancements <-- I'm a frontend dev w/ an eye for design but not a DESIGNER - if you ARE! HELP!
- Tests and quality improvements

**Before submitting:**
1. Read Documention for coding philosophy and patterns
2. Ensure changes align with our lightweight, offline-first approach
3. Test locally with `bun run dev`
4. Keep PRs focused on a single feature or fix

## 📄 License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

---

## ⭐ Star History

If Faster Chat helps you take control of your AI conversations, consider giving us a star!

[![Star History Chart](https://api.star-history.com/svg?repos=1337hero/faster-chat&type=date&legend=top-left)](https://www.star-history.com/#1337hero/faster-chat&type=date&legend=top-left)

---

<p align="center">
  <strong>Built with ❤️ by <a href="https://github.com/1337hero" target="_blank">1337Hero</a>  for developers who value privacy, speed, and control.</strong><br>
  <sub>No tracking. No analytics. Just fast, local-first AI conversations.</sub>
</p>

Commit message:

Add automatic encryption key generation on first run
- Auto-generate API_KEY_ENCRYPTION_KEY if missing (server/src/init.js)
- Run init script before server starts (dev, start, Docker)
- Create data directories automatically
- Idempotent initialization (safe to run multiple times)

- server/src/init.js: New initialization script
- server/package.json: Add init to dev/start scripts
- Dockerfile: Run init before server startup
- README.md: Document auto-generation behavior

- ✅ Zero manual setup required - just run `bun run dev`
- ✅ No more "missing encryption key" errors
- ✅ Works in Docker without manual .env creation
- ✅ Clear security warnings about backing up .env

The init script:
1. Generates 32-byte encryption key if .env missing
2. Appends key to existing .env if key not found
3. Creates data/ and data/uploads/ directories
4. Shows security notice on first key generation
5. Skips generation on subsequent runs (idempotent)

Resolves the UX issue where users couldn't create accounts
without manually generating the encryption key first.

README.md, after:

# ⚡ Faster Chat

<p align="left">
  <a href="https://preactjs.com/">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Preact-10.25-673AB7?logo=preact" alt="Preact" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://hono.dev/">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Hono-4.7-FF6B00" alt="Hono" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://tailwindcss.com/">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Tailwind-4.1-38BDF8?logo=tailwindcss" alt="Tailwind CSS" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://tanstack.com/router">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/TanStack%20Router-1.98-FF4154" alt="TanStack Router" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://dexie.org/">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Dexie-IndexedDB-orange?logo=javascript" alt="Dexie" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://sdk.vercel.ai/">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Vercel%20AI%20SDK-Streaming-black?logo=vercel" alt="Vercel AI SDK" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://bun.sh/">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Bun-Fast%20Builds-yellow?logo=bun" alt="Bun" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT">
    <img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green" alt="MIT License" />
  </a>
</p>

> **A blazingly fast, privacy-first chat interface for AI that works with any LLM provider—cloud or completely offline.**

Connect to OpenAI, Anthropic, Groq, Mistral, or run completely offline with [Ollama](https://ollama.ai/) or [LMStudio](https://lmstudio.ai/) or even [llama.cpp](https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp). Your conversations stay local in on your machine. No vendor lock-in, no tracking, full control.

![Faster Chat Interface](faster-chat.png)

## ✨ Features

**Core**
- 💬 Real-time streaming chat with Vercel AI SDK
- ⚡ **Blazingly fast** - 3KB Preact runtime, zero SSR overhead, instant responses
- 🗄️ **Conversations stay on your machine** - Local-first IndexedDB & SQLite storage, never sent to server
- 🤖 Multi-provider support: OpenAI, Anthropic, Ollama, Groq, Mistral, custom APIs
- 📎 File attachments with preview and download
- 📝 Markdown rendering with syntax highlighting and LaTeX support
- 📱 Responsive design for desktop, tablet, and mobile (reguraly improving)

**Administration**
- 🔐 Multi-user authentication with role-based access (admin/member/readonly)
- 🔌 **Provider Hub**: Auto-discover models with [models.dev](https://models.dev) integration
- 🛡️ Admin panel for user management (CRUD, password reset, role changes)
- 🔑 Encrypted API key storage with server-side encryption

**Deployment**
- 🌐 Works completely offline with local models (Ollama, LM Studio, etc.)
- 🐳 One-command Docker deployment with optional HTTPS via Caddy
- 🎨 Modern stack: Preact + Hono + TanStack + Tailwind 4.1

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- [Bun](https://bun.sh/) (recommended) or Node.js 20+
- At least one AI provider:
  - **Offline**: [Ollama](https://ollama.ai/) running locally
  - **Cloud**: API key from OpenAI, Anthropic, Groq, Mistral, or OpenRouter
  - **Self-Hosted**: LM Studio, vLLM, or any OpenAI-compatible inference server

### Installation

```bash
# Clone and install
git clone https://github.com/1337hero/faster-next-chat.git
cd faster-next-chat
bun install

# Start development servers (auto-generates encryption key on first run)
bun run dev
```

**On first run**, the server will automatically:
- ✅ Generate a secure encryption key for API key storage (`server/.env`)
- ✅ Create required data directories
- ✅ Initialize the SQLite database

The app will be available at:
- **Frontend**: http://localhost:3000
- **API Server**: http://localhost:3001

> **Important**: Backup `server/.env` - this file contains the encryption key needed to decrypt stored API keys. Don't commit it to git (already in .gitignore).

### First-Time Setup

1. **Register an account** at http://localhost:3000/login
   - The first account is automatically promoted to admin
2. **Configure AI providers** in the Admin Panel (`/admin` → Providers tab):
   - Add OpenAI, Anthropic, or other cloud providers with API keys
   - Configure local providers (Ollama, LM Studio) with custom endpoints
   - API keys are encrypted and stored securely server-side
3. **Enable models** in the Admin Panel (Providers tab → Refresh Models)
   - Select which models appear in the chat interface
   - Set default model for new chats

![API Connections Management](connections.png)
*Configure providers and API keys in the Admin Panel*

![Available Models](models.png)
*Enable and manage models from all your providers*

### Using Offline with Ollama

```bash
# Install Ollama (macOS/Linux)
curl -fsSL https://ollama.ai/install.sh | sh

# Pull a model
ollama pull llama3.2

# Start Ollama (usually runs automatically)
ollama serve

# In Faster Chat Admin Panel:
# 1. Go to /admin → Providers tab
# 2. Add Custom Provider with base URL: http://localhost:11434
# 3. Refresh Models to discover available Ollama models
```

### Custom Provider Setup

Faster Chat works with **any OpenAI-compatible API**. Add custom providers through the Admin Panel:

**LM Studio**
- Base URL: `http://localhost:1234/v1`
- No API key required

**Groq Cloud**
- Base URL: `https://api.groq.com/openai/v1`
- API Key: `gsk_...`

**OpenRouter** (access 100+ models)
- Base URL: `https://openrouter.ai/api/v1`
- API Key: `sk-or-...`

**Mistral AI**
- Base URL: `https://api.mistral.ai/v1`
- API Key: Your Mistral API key

**Self-hosted vLLM/TGI**
- Base URL: `http://your-server:8000/v1`
- API Key: Optional, depending on your setup

## 💻 Development

### Commands

**Root (recommended)**
```bash
bun run dev         # Start frontend + backend concurrently
bun run build       # Build all packages for production
bun run start       # Run production builds
bun run clean       # Remove all build artifacts
bun run format      # Format code with Prettier
```

**Frontend**
```bash
cd frontend
bun run dev         # Vite dev server on :3000
bun run build       # Production build to dist/
bun run preview     # Preview production build
```

**Backend**
```bash
cd server
bun run dev         # Hono dev server on :3001
bun run build       # Build for production
bun run start       # Run production server on :3001
```

### Project Structure

See WIKI for detailed architecture documentation. Quick overview:

```
faster-chat/
├── frontend/        # Preact SPA
│   ├── components/  # UI components
│   ├── hooks/       # Custom hooks
│   ├── lib/         # Utilities, DB, API
│   └── state/       # Zustand stores
├── server/          # Hono API server
│   ├── routes/      # API endpoints
│   ├── lib/         # Database, auth, utils
│   └── data/        # SQLite DB + uploads
└── packages/
    └── shared/      # Shared constants
```

## 🐳 Docker Deployment

### Quick Start

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/1337hero/faster-next-chat.git
cd faster-next-chat

# Create environment file with encryption key
echo "API_KEY_ENCRYPTION_KEY=$(node -e "console.log(require('crypto').randomBytes(32).toString('hex'))")" > server/.env

# Start with Docker
docker compose up -d

# Access at http://localhost:8787
```

**First-time setup:**
1. Register your first user (becomes admin automatically)
2. Configure AI providers in Admin Panel (`/admin` → Providers tab)
3. Add your API keys and refresh models

### Architecture

**Hybrid build for maximum compatibility:**
- Builder: Bun 1.3 on Debian (fast dependency installation)
- Runtime: Node.js 22 on Debian (native module compatibility)
- Port: 8787 (configurable via `APP_PORT`)
- Storage: SQLite database in `chat-data` volume

### HTTPS with Caddy (Optional)

For production deployments with automatic HTTPS:

```bash
# Start with Caddy reverse proxy
docker compose -f docker-compose.yml -f docker-compose.caddy.yml up -d

# Local development: http://localhost
# Production: Edit Caddyfile with your domain, point DNS, restart
```

**Features:**
- Automatic HTTPS with Let's Encrypt
- Certificate auto-renewal
- HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 support
- Compression and security headers
- Only 13MB overhead (Alpine-based)

See `docs/caddy-https-setup.md` and `docs/docker-setup.md` for details.

### Configuration

**Environment Variables** (`server/.env`):

```bash
# Required: Encryption key for API keys
API_KEY_ENCRYPTION_KEY=...  # Generate with crypto.randomBytes(32)

# Optional: Configure via Admin Panel instead
APP_PORT=8787              # Internal port (default: 8787)
NODE_ENV=production        # Environment mode
DATABASE_URL=sqlite:///app/server/data/chat.db

# For local Ollama access from Docker
OLLAMA_BASE_URL=http://host.docker.internal:11434
```

**Common Commands:**

```bash
docker compose up -d                # Start
docker compose logs -f              # View logs
docker compose down                 # Stop
docker compose up -d --build        # Rebuild

# Reset database
docker compose down
docker volume rm faster-chat_chat-data
docker compose up -d
```


## 🗺️ Roadmap

### Completed ✅
- Preact + Hono migration from Next.js
- Streaming chat with Vercel AI SDK
- Local-first persistence (IndexedDB + SQLite)
- Multi-provider support (OpenAI, Anthropic, Ollama, custom APIs)
- Admin panel for providers, models, and users
- Role-based access control
- File attachments with preview/download
- Markdown, code highlighting, LaTeX rendering
- Docker deployment with optional HTTPS

### In Progress 🚧
- [ ] Tool calling implementation (infrastructure ready)
- [ ] Image generation integration (DALL-E, Stable Diffusion, local models)
- [ ] Web search capabilities (optional internet access for AI)


### Planned 📋

**Settings & UX**
- [ ] Keyboard shortcuts and accessibility improvements
- [ ] Advanced user preferences UI (themes, defaults, behavior)
- [ ] Conversation branching (explore alternative responses)
- [ ] Import & Export Data Functionality (JSON, Markdown, CSV)

**Advanced Capabilities**
- [ ] Local RAG with vector search (private document search)
- [ ] Voice input/output (speech-to-text, text-to-speech)
- [ ] Multi-modal requests (vision, audio)
- [ ] Conversation sharing and collaboration

**Infrastructure**

- [ ] PostgreSQL backend option (for larger deployments)
- [ ] Plugin system for custom extensions
- [ ] Mobile app (Capacitor)

## 🎨 Design Philosophy

**Faster Chat** is built on these principles:

- **Privacy-First**: Your data lives in your browser. Server is optional.
- **Provider-Agnostic**: Never locked into a single AI vendor.
- **Minimal Runtime**: 3KB Preact, no SSR overhead, instant responses.
- **Offline-Capable**: Run completely offline with local models.
- **Fast Iteration**: Bun for speed, no TypeScript ceremony, clear patterns.
- **Simple Code**: Small focused components, derive state in render, delete aggressively.

### Why No TypeScript?

We chose **speed over ceremony**. TypeScript's compile step and constant type churn across fast-moving AI SDKs slowed development more than it helped.

**Our guardrails:**
- Runtime validation at system boundaries
- Shared constants and clear contracts
- Tests for critical paths
- JSDoc for complex functions

**Trade-off:** Less friction, faster iteration, easier contribution.

See WIKI for detailed coding principles and architecture documentation.

## 🙏 Credits & Acknowledgments

**Faster Chat** is built on the shoulders of excellent open source projects:

**Core Infrastructure**
- [Vercel AI SDK](https://github.com/vercel/ai) - Streaming chat completions and multi-provider support
- [models.dev](https://github.com/sst/models.dev) - Community-maintained AI model database for auto-discovery
- [Preact](https://preactjs.com/) - Lightweight 3KB React alternative
- [Hono](https://hono.dev/) - Ultrafast web framework for the backend
- [Dexie.js](https://dexie.org/) - Elegant IndexedDB wrapper for local-first storage
- [TanStack Router](https://tanstack.com/router) & [TanStack Query](https://tanstack.com/query) - Modern routing and server state management

**UI & Styling**
- [Tailwind CSS](https://tailwindcss.com/) - Utility-first CSS framework
- [lucide-react](https://lucide.dev/) - Beautiful icon library
- [Catppuccin](https://github.com/catppuccin/catppuccin) - Soothing pastel theme

**External API Calls**

For transparency, this application makes the following external API calls:
- **models.dev/api.json** - Fetches provider and model metadata on server startup (cached for 1 hour)
- **Your configured AI providers** (OpenAI, Anthropic, etc.) - Only when you send chat messages
- **No tracking, analytics, or telemetry services** - Your privacy is paramount

All conversations stay local in your browser's IndexedDB. The server handles authentication, provider configuration, and file uploads—but never stores your chat messages.

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions welcome! We're looking for:
- Bug fixes and error handling
- New provider integrations
- Documentation improvements
- UI/UX enhancements <-- I'm a frontend dev w/ an eye for design but not a DESIGNER - if you ARE! HELP!
- Tests and quality improvements

**Before submitting:**
1. Read Documention for coding philosophy and patterns
2. Ensure changes align with our lightweight, offline-first approach
3. Test locally with `bun run dev`
4. Keep PRs focused on a single feature or fix

## 📄 License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

---

## ⭐ Star History

If Faster Chat helps you take control of your AI conversations, consider giving us a star!

[![Star History Chart](https://api.star-history.com/svg?repos=1337hero/faster-chat&type=date&legend=top-left)](https://www.star-history.com/#1337hero/faster-chat&type=date&legend=top-left)

---

<p align="center">
  <strong>Built with ❤️ by <a href="https://github.com/1337hero" target="_blank">1337Hero</a>  for developers who value privacy, speed, and control.</strong><br>
  <sub>No tracking. No analytics. Just fast, local-first AI conversations.</sub>
</p>
